## Abstract

Psychiatric treatment is sought by and offered to people who experience or express some sort of emotional suffering or mental distress. This suffering can be understood in a variety of different ways, for example as a medical, psychological or social problem. This, in turn, decides what to do to ease the suffering. The purpose of this research project is to gain a deeper understanding of how psychiatric health care professionals navigate between different understandings of mental illness, and how they play themselves out in their understandings in relation to the patients' membership in different sex categories and other social categories. In psychiatric health care, medical and psychological understanding of mental illness, as expressed in psychiatric diagnostic manuals, are predominant. Although variations in mental illness, in relation to social categories such as gender, ethnicity and socioeconomic status, are frequently studied, it is unknown how psychiatric health care professionals make use of socio-cultural understandings of mental illness, in relation to their daily work with patients. The project will be a cooperation between the Department of Psychology at Umeå University and Department of Education at Stockholm University and will be carried out over four years. Psychiatric health care professionals who work with diagnosing and treating patients will be interviewed. The theoretical framework is based on a socio-cultural understanding of mental health and includes theories about social categorization, especially in relation to understandings of normality, and intersectionality theory. Discourse analysis will be used for the analysis. A reference group of senior researchers, with expert knowledge of the field, is tied to the project. The results will be published in Swedish and international peer-reviewed journals. The findings are expected to be of value to psychiatric health care professionals who wish to transcend the predominant medical understanding of mental illness and work with other aspects of their patients' lives, including taking gender, ethnicity, socioceconomic status and other social categories into account. In its focus on how social equality is understood and expressed, in talk and action by health care professionals in relation to their patients, this project will also be of relevance to people whose task it is, or who are striving, to promote social equaliy in psychiatric health care - *in practice, as well as in theory*. Finally, the study is expected to contribute to an enhanced theoretic dialogue between individually (medical and psychological) and socio-culturally based perspectives on mental health. 
